Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society, 2016. With 3 figures

Phylogenetic analysis of Attalea (Arecaceae): insights into the historical biogeography of a recently diversified Neotropical plant group
CINTIA FREITAS1,2*, ALAN W. MEEROW3, JEAN-CHRISTOPHE PINTAUD4, ANDREW HENDERSON1, LARRY NOBLICK5, FLAVIA R. C. COSTA6, CARLOS E. BARBOSA6 and DAVID BARRINGTON2
1The New York Botanical Garden, 2900 Southern Blvd., Bronx, NY 10458, USA 2Plant Biology Department, University of Vermont, 63 Carrigan Drive, Burlington, VT 05405, USA 3USDA-ARS, National Germplasm Repository, 13601 Old Cutler Road, Miami, FL 33158, USA 4UMR 232 DIADE/DYNADIV, Institut de Recherche pour le Developpement (IRD), BP 64501, 911 avenue Agropolis, F-34394 Montpellier, France 5Montgomery Botanical Center, 11901 Old Cutler Rd, Coral Gables, FL 33156, USA 6Instituto de Pesquisas da Amaz^onia, Av. Ephige^nio Sales 2239, CEP 69011-970, Manaus, Amazonas, Brazil
Received 21 September 2015; revised 20 May 2016; accepted for publication 28 June 2016

We present a dated phylogenetic tree for the Neotropical genus Attalea (Arecaceae). We used six orthologues from the nuclear WRKY gene family across 98 accessions to address relationships among species and biogeographical hypotheses. We found that the formerly recognized groups within Attalea are not monophyletic and therefore there is no support for multiple genera as previously thought. Species of Attalea-like palms from the Atlantic forest form a well-supported clade sister to the Attalea species from Amazonia, the Andean valleys and Mesoamerica. Dates for the main divergence events suggest a relationship with the development of the dry forests that now span eastern South America and the now-lost Pebas Lake region in the western Amazon. Attalea crassispatha possibly colonized Hispaniola by a long-distance dispersal event, not via the land bridge Great Antilles Avian Ridge (GAAR), before the Panama channel closed. The common ancestor of Attalea appears to have been an Atlantic forest clade c. 30 Mya. The early split between the Atlantic-forest clade and the two Amazonian-northern Andean clades was probably the result of climatic changes that caused an increase in aridity in South America. © 2016 The Linnean Society of London, Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society, 2016
KEYWORDS: Bayesian inference ­ molecular phylogeny ­ neotropics ­ palm phylogeny ­ South America.

INTRODUCTION
The incorporation of molecular phylogenetic information is now standard for finding relationships between species (Roncal et al., 2010) and testing biogeographical hypotheses (Crisp, Trewick & Cook, 2011) to establish and ultimately to test hypotheses related to patterns of richness in tropical regions (e.g. Bjorholm, Svenning & Baker, 2006). However, in tropical regions, where biodiversity is highest, the lack of collections from remote areas (Hopkins, 2007)
*Corresponding author. E-mail: cintia.freitas@ufg.edu.br Deceased 10 August 2015.

and the incomplete nature of the collections that have been made impede the correct delineation of phylogenetic relationships, the development of accurate biogeographical hypotheses and our understanding of the evolutionary history of species (Roncal et al., 2010; Crisp et al., 2011). Arecaceae are an ideal group for testing biogeographical hypotheses in tropical areas because palms are diverse and abundant, have a long evolutionary history in humid forests (Roncal et al., 2010; Baker & Couvreur, 2013a), are known to influence the distribution of other species (Terborgh, 1992) and are phylogenetically well resolved at the subfamilial level (Asmussen et al., 2006; Couvreur, Forest & Baker, 2011).

© 2016 The Linnean Society of London, Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society, 2016

1

2 C. FREITAS ET AL.

Attalea, a prominent genus of palms throughout tropical America, belongs to subfamily Arecoideae, tribe Cocoseae; it is one of ten [previously 11, since Lytocaryum was included in Syagrus (Noblick & Meerow, 2015)] monophyletic genera of subtribe Attaleinae. Attalea spp. are found from Mexico as far south as Bolivia and Paraguay and from the lower slopes of the Andes (reaching 1600 m) to the northeastern coast of Brazil (Henderson, 1995; Dransfield et al., 2008), which is hypothesized to be the centre of distribution of the genus (Meerow et al., 2009). Attalea exhibits high ecological variation, suggesting successful colonization of new areas and great adaptive potential. It occurs on dunes, in tropical rainforest and in Cerrado (Dransfield et al., 2008). The Cerrado encompasses the savanna woodlands found across Brazil, i.e. campos rupestres, (rocky savannas) and Pantanal (the seasonally inundated floodplain located in the south-western most part of the cerrado biome) (Oliveira-Filho & Ratter, 2002). In the cerrado, Attalea is part of a characteristic vegetation associated with sandstone and quartzite soils (Ribeiro & Walter, 1998). However, the historical biogeography of Attalea remains elusive despite the contribution of two pioneering studies (Meerow et al., 2009, 2014).
Diagnostic morphological features are related to the staminate flowers, which are asymmetrical, with three small sepals and three slightly larger petals (Dransfield et al., 2008). The stamens are shorter or rarely longer than the petals and the anthers can be from straight to twisted and coiled; the flowers may have a minute pistillode or none (Dransfield et al., 2008). Like many other palms, Attalea spp. show a variety of habits from acaulescent to erect, but the stems are always solitary (Tomlinson, 2006). According to Glassman (1999), leaf anatomy is of limited use for the classification of Attalea, although it seems promising in the closely allied genus Syagrus, in which variation was found to be congruent with molecular data (Noblick, 2013) and in the six Allagoptera spp. that have clearly distinct leaf anatomies (Pinedo et al., 2016; this issue).
The taxonomy of Attalea is controversial, with treatments varying in terms of generic limits and number of species. Characters of the staminate flowers were previously used to recognize four segregate genera, but they are not currently accepted (Dransfield et al., 2008). The two most recent treatments proposed different classifications: Glassman (1999) accepted 66 species in four genera (Attalea, Scheelea H.Karst., Orbignya Mart. ex Endl. and Maximiliana Mart.) and Henderson (1995) accepted a single genus Attalea with 27 or 31 species (A. Henderson, unpubl. data). The Kew Checklist (WCSP, 2015) accepts 66 Attalea spp. and four hybrids. Consensus on Attalea

species delineation has been reached for only 20 of them (Pintaud, 2008). The source of the taxonomic disagreement may lie in the lack of appropriate botanical material, high rate of hybridization and difficulties in the interpretation of hybrids (Pintaud, 2008). Hybridization has mostly been suggested between widespread species, e.g. Attalea speciosa Mart. and A. vitrivir Zona (Henderson, 1995; Glassman, 1999). Attalea oleifera Barb.Rodr. and A. funifera Mart. are also thought to hybridize in the Atlantic forest (Bondar, 1942).
Like most palms, Attalea spp. have great economic and cultural importance for local communities. They are used to produce cosmetics [Attalea insignis (Mart.) Drude in Engl. & Prantl] and medicines against hepatitis [A. butyracea (Mutis ex L.f.) Wess.Boer and A. maripa (Aubl.) Mart.)] (Balslev et al., 2008). The leaves of some Attalea spp. are used in religious ceremonies and in the extraction of palm hearts, e.g. A. microcarpa Mart., A. racemosa Spruce, A. phalerata Mart. ex Spreng. and A. plowmanii (Glassman) Zona (Balslev et al., 2008). Attalea butyracea has great commercial potential in the production of ethanol and sugar (Bernal & Galeano, 2010). Babassu (A. speciosa) is used to produce palm oil in Brazil (Anderson, May & Balick, 1991) and is by far the most important native palm used in that country.
Recent phylogenetic studies of the palm family (Baker et al., 2009; Couvreur et al., 2011), subfamily Arecoideae (Asmussen et al., 2006), tribe Cocoseae (Meerow et al., 2014) and subtribe Attaleinae (Meerow et al., 2009) have improved our understanding of the phylogenetic relationships of Attalea. Meerow et al. (2009, 2014) used WRKY genes (short for the WRKYGQK conserved amino acid sequence that gives name to the WRKY domain of these genes) to resolve phylogenetic relationships in Cocoseae and Attaleinae, but included only 16 Attalea spp. Attalea was resolved as sister to the remaining Neotropical members of the subtribe in Meerow et al. (2009). The analysis of Cocoseae by Meerow et al. (2014) resolved Attalea as sister to Cocos, albeit with some ambiguity. In a study of Arecaceae by Baker et al. (2009), Attalea was resolved as sister to a clade comprising Allagoptera, Polyandrococos, Lytocaryum and Syagrus. Although Attalea was retrieved as monophyletic in these studies, resolution of some of the more terminal clades in the genus was poor.
The WRKY gene superfamily has proved to be useful in resolving the phylogenetic history of palms, as demonstrated in tribe Cocoseae (Meerow et al., 2009, 2014). The superfamily, mostly found in plants, has at least 55 members (Cannon et al., 2004), originating during whole-genome duplication events and in the course of divergent evolution, especially in

© 2016 The Linnean Society of London, Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society, 2016

ATTALEA: PHYLOGENETICS AND BIOGEOGRAPHY 3

monocots (Wu et al., 2005). The superfamily shows remarkably low levels of paralogy; in Oryza sativa subsp. indica, 99 of the 102 described WRKY loci are present as single copies; in O. sativa subsp. japonica, 97 of the 98 loci are present as single copies (Ross, Liu & Shen, 2007). WRKY genes are characterized by the highly conserved DNA binding sequence WRKYGQK followed by a C2H2- or C2HC-type zinc finger motif that codes for transcription factors. Expanded molecular phylogenetic analyses should help to resolve some of the taxonomic problems remaining in Attalea and provide the basis for testing biogeographical hypothesis, as has already been shown in Astrocaryum (Roncal et al., 2013), Bactris (Eiserhardt et al., 2011b) and Geonoma (Roncal et al., 2005).
The evolutionary history of Attalea seems to be recent (Meerow et al., 2009), and there is evidence of an increase in the diversification rate in an ancestor clade of Attalea around 15 Mya (Baker & Couvreur, 2013b) although an overall deceleration of rate change in Arecales compared with most monocots was found in a genome-wide plastid study (Barrett et al., 2015). Baker & Couvreur (2013a, b) also found evidence for a low rate of extinction in palms, which is supported by Meerow et al. (2009, 2014) for Cocoseae. Evidence for both a recent increase in diversification and an apparent low extinction rate indicates the influence of recent events that have led Attalea to reach its current diversity.
A biogeographical analysis of Attalea in a phylogenetic context provides the opportunity to test the role of the changing South American landscape in its diversification and to test alternative hypotheses for these landscape-level changes. The main biogeographical events that might have influenced the diversification of Attalea include: (1) the flow reversal of the Amazon River; (2) the formation of open dry forests across South America; (3) the marine incursions on the Amazon Region; (4) the final closure of the Panama channel; and (5) the uplift of the northernmost part of the Andes. Regarding the Amazon river flow reversal, the timing is the most contentious aspect. First, c. 15 Mya, a time when the Andes were approximately half their current elevation, the Amazon River was already running to the east (Hoorn et al., 2010b). An opposing view dates these events as much more recent, with the uplift of the northern Andes and the flow reversal occurring between c. 5 and 3 Mya (Latrubesse et al., 2010).
Second, we hypothesize that the distribution centre of Attalea was in the forest along the eastern coast of Brazil. However, the effects of the isolation of the Atlantic forest from the Amazon caused by the formation of the open dry forest across South America (Chaco, Cerrado and Caatinga) on the evolution

of Attalea have yet to be determined. In fact, isolation of the Atlantic forest appears to be a causal factor of species endemism (Myers et al., 2000). Third, the influence of the two main marine incursions in the Amazon region, with occurrences dating back to 15­10 and 5 Mya (Jordan et al., 2005), can also be tested. Finally, the uplift of the northernmost Andes and the consequent closing of the Caribbean Sea and lake complex formation in the western Amazon may also have influenced the diversification of this group. These questions are central to our inquiry using a phylogenetic approach combined with a processbased biogeographical hypothesis. Attalea, speciesrich and widespread in the region, is an excellent model lineage for testing the effects of these largescale biogeographical events on species evolution.
In this study we sought to add to the rapidly expanding understanding of infrageneric tropical palm species relationships (Roncal et al., 2005; Eiserhardt et al., 2011b), with a phylogenetic and biogeographical analysis of Attalea. The main objectives of this study were to build a robust dated phylogenetic tree for Attalea based on an extensive collection and to use this tree to: (1) increase the level of taxonomic consensus in the group; and (2) test phylogenetic and biogeographical hypotheses. More specifically, our research questions were as follows. (1) Are there monophyletic lineages within Attalea? (2) Was the most recent common ancestor of Attalea originally from the Brazilian Atlantic forest? (3) How do Amazon-forest biogeographical scenarios relate to the divergence history of Attalea? (4) What is the role of the Cerrado biome in divergence of Attalea?
MATERIAL AND METHODS
TAXON SAMPLING AND MOLECULAR MARKERS
Most samples were collected fresh in the wild at several sites across the Brazilian Amazon, Cerrado and Atlantic forests. Additional samples were collected at Fairchild Tropical Botanic Garden and Montgomery Botanical Center or donated by specialists. For widespread species, multiple accessions from different regions of the distribution area were obtained when possible. In total, we assembled 79 accessions representing 43 putative species (Supporting Information, Table S1). To increase the species sampling and make it comparable with Meerow et al. (2009, 2014), we downloaded from GenBank accessions of 19 additional Attalea samples and five other members of the subtribe for the six included WRKY markers. Overall, the sample included 100% of the 31 species recognized by A. Henderson (unpubl. data) and 57% of the 66 species recognized by Glassman (1999). Due to amplification difficulties, some sequences were not

© 2016 The Linnean Society of London, Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society, 2016

4 C. FREITAS ET AL.

available for all taxa (Supporting Information, Table S2). The data were then concatenated into a supermatrix combining the six WRKY datasets.
Based on previous studies with the WRKY loci (Meerow et al., 2009, 2014), we chose Allagoptera arenaria (Gomes) Kuntze, Beccariophoenix madagascariensis Jum. & H.Perrier, Cocos nucifera L., Jubea chilensis (Molina) Baill. and Syagrus sancona H.Karst. as outgroups. Where previous work included multiple species (in Allagoptera and Syagrus), we chose the earliest-divergent species for inclusion in the outgroup. Voucher information and GenBank accession numbers are reported in Supporting Information (Table S3). Six loci of the transcription factor WRKY family (WRKY6, WRKY7, WRKY12, WRKY16, WRKY19 and WRKY21) were sampled for this study.
DNA EXTRACTION, AMPLIFICATION AND SEQUENCING
Total DNA was extracted from a 0.5-cm piece of silica-dried leaf material stored at À80 °C using an adaptation of the CTAB protocol (Doyle & Doyle, 1987). The WRKY samples were amplified using the primers reported in Meerow et al. (2009) and one of two different protocols. First, 2.5 lL buffer, 0.5 lL dNTPs, 0.5 lL bovine serum albumin (BSA), 17.875 lL ddH2O, 0.125 lL Taq, 0.5 lL forward primer, 0.5 lL reverse primer and 1 lL template DNA, adding up to 23.5 lL. Second, 10.5 lL ddH2O, 12.5 lL Taq Bullseye, 0.5 lL forward primer F, 0.5 lL reverse primer and 1 lL template DNA, adding up to 25 lL (see Supporting Information, Table S4 for primer sequences and annealing temperatures).
We amplified the samples in TC3000 and TC3000x thermal cyclers (Techne; Bibby Scientific) using the following conditions: initial denaturation of 95 °C for 2 min, [95 °C, 30 s, 58­64 °C, 30 s, 72 °C, 60 s] 9 35 cycles, final extension at 72 °C for 10 min, and final hold at 4 °C. The success of the amplifications was tested by electrophoresis in a solution of TAE buffer and ethidium bromide and visualized in a 1.5% agarose gel under UV light (Bio-Rad). We sent the samples for sequencing to Beckman Coulter Genomics.
ALIGNMENT AND PHYLOGENETIC ANALYSES
Sequences were aligned using the L-INS-I algorithm in MAFFT v7.017 (Katoh et al., 2002) as implemented in Geneious (Biomatters Development Team, 2005­2013; Biomatters Ltd) and edited manually. Gaps were coded as characters using the simple coding method of Simmons & Ochoterena (2000), as implemented in SeqState 1.0 (Muller, 2005). Optimal

evolutionary models were tested for each region (partition) (Supporting Information, Table S4) using jModeltest 2 (Darriba et al., 2012) using the Akaike information criterion (AIC) to select the best model. We assumed that each of the WRKY regions had evolved independently as they were spread across different groups of the WRKY gene family and four of them are intron-only regions. The concatenated nuclear sequences were analysed using Bayesian inference (BI) with MrBayes v3.2 (Ronquist et al., 2012). BI ran for 200 million generations in two independent analyses of four Monte Carlo Markov chains (MCMCs), one `cold' and three heated, and with trees sampled every 20 000 generations. Stationarity was determined using the log-likelihood scores for each run in the program Tracer v1.6 (Drummond et al., 2012). Twenty-five per cent of the trees were discarded as the burn-in phase. A 50% majority rule consensus tree was calculated for the remaining trees and visualized together with posterior probabilities from MrBayes on FigTree v1.4.1 (Drummond et al., 2012). All analyses were carried out on the CIPRES Portal (Miller, Pfeiffer & Schwartz, 2010).
MOLECULAR DATING AND FOSSIL CALIBRATION
Beast v1.8.1 (Drummond et al., 2012) was used to estimate the divergence times assuming a log-normal uncorrelated relaxed molecular clock under the Yule tree prior. We used fossils described in Futey et al. (2012) to set 62 Mya as a calibration point for Attaleinae and 23.6 Mya, the age reported by Meerow et al. (2014), for the stem age of Attalea. The fossil described in Futey et al. (2012) is a specimen of Tripylocarpa, a fossil genus assigned to Cocoseae which consists of one-seeded ovoid drupes with three longitudinal grooves that might indicate the presence of three valves, and an apical germination pore and basal hilum. We used a uniform distribution of priors for the Attaleinae calibration point with 62 Mya as the lower bound and initial value and 100 Mya as the upper bound, following Eiserhardt et al. (2011a). For the secondary calibration point we used a normal distribution with 23.6 Mya as the mean based on Meerow et al. (2009), 1.0 as initial value and a standard deviation of 3. We ran the Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) analysis for 200 million generations to reach ESS values > 200 for all parameters evaluated in Tracer v1.6. We sampled the MCMC every 20 000 trees and 25% were then excluded as burnin. The remaining trees were used to obtain the posterior distribution of node ages in a maximum clade credibility (MCC) chronogram, visualized in Figtree v1.4.1 (Drummond et al., 2012).

© 2016 The Linnean Society of London, Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society, 2016

ATTALEA: PHYLOGENETICS AND BIOGEOGRAPHY 5

RECOMBINATION DETECTION
We used the RDP4 (Martin & Rybicki, 2000), MaxChi (Maynard Smith, 1992) and GENECONV (Padidam, Sawyer & Fauquet, 1999) methods implemented in the RDP4 program (Martin et al., 2010) to detect recombination events between samples. These methods implement a search for possible breakpoints that could indicate recombination events in triplets of sequences in the alignment and then attempt to identify the parent and the recombinant genotypes. We defined a criterion to accept the breakpoint positions and recombinant identities (Supporting Information, Table S5). First, we noted how many methods support a specific event as recommended by the authors. We excluded events that were supported by only one method. Second, we visually inspected the original alignments looking for major changes in the triplets of sequences matching with the breakpoints identified by the methods. We also compared the breakpoint positions between the different methods for congruence assessment. Third, we checked how the supposed recombinant changed position compared with the potential parents using UPGMA and maximum-likelihood trees provided by the program. A recombination event was accepted if it was supported by more than one of the three methods.
RECONSTRUCTIONS OF ANCESTRAL AREAS
We used Lagrange build 20130526 (Ree & Smith, 2008) to perform an ancestral area reconstruction (hereafter AAR) for Attalea. This program uses a maximum-likelihood inference of geographical range evolution based on the dispersal, extinction and cladogenesis (DEC) model. Based on palaeogeography and current distribution areas for Attalea we chose seven areas (see Fig. 3): Central America and Hispaniola (A); Choco including Colombian and Venezuelan valleys (B); Andes (C); Amazon forest (D); Cerrado (E); Atlantic forest (F); and Madagascar (G), to which Beccariophoenix madagascariensis is endemic. We decided not to subdivide the Amazon forest because of the low resolution of some Amazonian clades and because our question does not require such a level of detail. We also decided to keep Hispaniola together with Central America to avoid further subdivision in justification of a single species, A. crassispatha (Mart.) Burret, that is endemic to the island even though we know that those two regions have different biogeographical histories. We built a presence­absence matrix by distribution area as the input file for Lagrange. We used all the nodes of the MCC tree from Beast and we allowed the ancestral lineage to occur in four areas (maximum number of ancestral areas ­ max. range size

parameter at the configuration file). To reconstruct the ancestral areas we implemented four time slices (62­42, 42­25, 25­11 and 11 Mya­present) with spatial and temporal constraints reflecting landscape changes in the whole distribution area through time.
First, we established no constraints for adjacent areas such as Amazon forest, Cerrado and Atlantic forest. Overall we established a 1.0 rate for adjacent areas, 0.5 for non-adjacent areas with no other barrier or for adjacent areas with a barrier and a low, but not impossible, rate of 0.01 between distant areas. We established a 0.01 rate between Central America and Choco, increasing to 0.5 in the third time slice to reflect the first pulse of biotic interchange (Bacon et al., 2015) and to 1.0 in the fourth time slice to represent the final and most significant closure. An initial rate of 0.5 was assigned between the Andes and Choco, lowered to 0.01 in the fourth time slice indicating the full rise of the Andes. The dispersal rate involving Cerrado was kept as 0.0 until the third time slice because this region is hypothesized to have not existed before then. For the third time slice onward, it is hypothesized that there was a decrease in temperatures and rainfall causing open vegetation to start dominating the central area of Brazil, isolating the coast from the Amazon region after the closure of the Drake Passage c. 40 Mya (Scher & Martin, 2006; Le Roux, 2012). We thus increased the dispersal rate according to our adjacency criteria. We hypothesize that the dry belt of South America including the Cerrado, Caatinga and Chaco (Chaco being the seasonally dry forest comprising Paraguay, Bolivia and Argentina; Zak & Cabido, 2002) appeared c. 10 Mya. Dispersal between Madagascar and all other areas was kept at 0.01 throughout all periods of time for simplification. The dispersal cost matrices are available in Supporting Information (Table S6).
RESULTS
PHYLOGENETIC ANALYSIS
Gene trees for single markers showed low resolution overall with the exception of WRKY16 and 21 (Supporting Information, Figs S1­S6). For the 79 samples, amplification success was relatively consistent across the markers, 68 (86%) for WRKY6, 63 (79%) for WRKY7, 67 (85%) for WRKY12, 57 (72%) for WRKY16, 53 (67%) for WRKY19 and 64 (81%) for WRKY21. The Bayesian 50% majority-rule tree (Fig. 1, see node numbering to follow description) recovered Attalea s.l. as monophyletic with strong support [node 2; posterior probability (PP) = 100] and Allagoptera was recovered as sister to the genus with strong support (node 1; PP = 100). In Attalea,

© 2016 The Linnean Society of London, Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society, 2016

6 C. FREITAS ET AL.
Figure 1. Bayesian 50% majority rule consensus tree of Attalea spp. and outgroup as a result of the concatenation of six WRKY nuclear markers in a supermatrix approach. Values above the branches are posterior probabilities. Numbers in bold red represent clades mentioned in the main text to help readers to follow results. Colours represent the groups in Attalea previously recognized as independent genera: Orbignya (blue), Maximiliana (orange), Scheelea (red) and Attalea s.s. (green).
© 2016 The Linnean Society of London, Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society, 2016

ATTALEA: PHYLOGENETICS AND BIOGEOGRAPHY 7

we recovered three main clades, the first comprising Atlantic Coastal forest Attalea spp. recovered with strong support (node 3; PP = 100), the second (node 5; PP = 87) including mostly species once recognized as Orbignya, primarily from Amazon and Cerrado (hereafter called Orbignya-like), and the third (node 6; PP = 100) comprising mostly species that were once recognized as Scheelea (Scheelea-like), and also mostly Attalea-like Orbignya-like from Choco-Amazonia (Fig. 1).
The Orbignya-like clade resolved with A. crassispatha, an endemic species from the southern peninsula of Hispaniola in the Greater Antilles, as sister to the remaining species (node 5; PP = 87). Within the clade, resolution is limited, but small well-supported clades included one uniting A. allenii Moore from Panama and two accessions of A. attaleoides (Barb.Rodr.) Wess.Boer from the central Amazon (node 7; PP = 98). Also resolved is a clade comprising A. barreirensis Glassman from the Brazilian Cerrado and A. moorei (Glassman) Zona from the Peruvian Amazon with high support (node 8; PP = 100) as sister to a Maximiliana-like clade (node 9; PP = 100) mostly from the Amazon basin with weak support. The remainder of this second main clade is a mix of species mostly from the Amazon and Cerrado regions.
The Scheelea-like clade, which has weak support (node 10; PP = 62), comprises species from Central America, the Choco and the Amazon and includes the `core Scheelea' clade (node 11; PP = 100), which has only one widespread species, A. phalerata, which also occurs in the Cerrado. Next we find a subclade including A. guacuyule (Liebm. ex Mart.) Zona, A. cohune Mart. and A. cuatrecasana (Dugand) A.J.Hend., Galeano & Bernal (node 12; PP = 100) and A. nucifera Karsten and A. allenii from Central America and the Choco (node 13; PP = 90). Additionally, we have a strongly supported group (node 14; PP = 99) of Orbignya-like species, including A. colenda (Cook) Balslev & A.J.Hend. from the Choco and A. ferruginea Burreit and A. racemosa Spruce from the western Amazon. The remainder of this clade forms a well-supported subclade including two samples of A. butyracea, paraphyletic to their conspecifics nested with A. amygdalina.
MOLECULAR DATING AND FOSSIL CALIBRATION
The majority of divergence events yielding current diversity of Attalea occurred between 15 and 5 Mya (chronogram, Fig. 2, see node numbering to follow description; Supporting Information, Fig. S7 for all values; Fig. S8 for collapsed nodes; Table S7 for dates for crown nodes of well-supported clades). The Attalea-like clade from the Atlantic forest is estimated to have diverged from the remainder of

Attalea s.l. at 22.9 Mya (node 1). In the Attalea-like clade, most of the divergence is inferred to have taken place during the last 10 Myr. The Scheelealike and Orbignya-like clades are estimated to have originated at 20 Mya (node 2). In the Orbignya-like clade, divergence of A. crassispatha from the ancestor of the remaining clade is estimated to have happened c. 17 Mya (node 3). The major divergence event giving rise to the Maximiliana-like clade is estimated to be c. 15 Mya, followed by the origin of A. barreirensis from the cerrado c. 13 Mya (node 4). Most species occurring in the Cerrado are sister to Amazonian clades and are recently diverged (< 10 Mya). In the Scheelea-like clade, the origin of the A. racemosa plus A. colenda clade (Choco plus western Amazon) is estimated at 17 Mya (node 5) and the origin of the clade uniting Attalea-like and the Orbignya-like species from the Choco is estimated to have happened c. 16 Mya (node 6).
DETECTION OF RECOMBINATION
Among the six markers used, only WRKY16 and WRKY21 had signals of recombination events. WRKY16 provided evidence for six events involving 12 samples representing ten species: A. maripa, A. guacuyule, A. insignis, A. brejinhoensis (Glassman) Zona, A. barreirensis, A. speciosa, A. phalerata, A. nucifera, A. microcarpa and A. humilis Mart. ex Spreng., of which only two events were accepted using our criteria (the first involving A. brejinhoensis_79, A. insignis_72 and A. speciosa_88 and the second involving A. phalerata_73, A. insignis_56 and A. maripa_63). WRKY21 had two recognized recombinant events involving six samples of five species: A. barreirensis, A. phalerata, A. butyracea, A. oleifera and A. funifera. We decided to exclude both recombination events involving WRKY21 because they do not hold under the criteria for event acceptance defined and described in the methods and explicitly marked in Supporting Information (Table S5). The identity of the putative parental species depends on the event and in most cases is uncertain, and in those cases the most probable close relative was chosen (i.e. A. guacuyule, A. insinis, A. speciosa, A. barreirensis, A. maripa, A. microcarpa, A. nucifera, A. butyracea, A. phalerata and A. funifera); see Supporting Information (Table S5) for details. We are aware that we were rather conservative in accepting recombination events; therefore, we have made the data available for further assessment.
RECONSTRUCTIONS OF ANCESTRAL AREAS
Ancestral area reconstruction is tentative; except for a few nodes, the average support in the chronogram

© 2016 The Linnean Society of London, Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society, 2016

8 C. FREITAS ET AL.
Figure 2. Maximum clade credibility tree showing the MCMC chronogram for Attalea. Values above the branches are posterior probabilities and values on the nodes are estimated ages. The 95% highest posterior densities are shown as bars in each node. Numbers in bold red represent clades mentioned in the main text to help readers to follow results. Colours represent the groups in Attalea previously recognized as independent genera: Orbignya (blue), Maximiliana (orange), Scheelea (red) and Attalea s.s. (green). The time scale is shown in millions of years.
© 2016 The Linnean Society of London, Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society, 2016

ATTALEA: PHYLOGENETICS AND BIOGEOGRAPHY 9

was 50% or lower. Our analysis (Fig. 3) suggests that the common ancestor of Attalea was probably an Atlantic coastal forest lineage c. 30 Mya. We infer three major divergence events yielding lineages endemic to the cerrado, the first c. 15 Mya and the second when the ancestor of the A. speciosa complex diverged from an Amazonian lineage at c. 6 Mya. The third event involving the ancestor of A. barreirensis sister to A. moorei (synonym A. cephalotus Poepp. ex Mart.) occurred c. 10 Mya. The strongly supported exclusively Atlantic forest clade originated c. 21 Mya. A long-distance dispersal event to Hispaniola c. 18 Mya might explain the origin of A. crassispatha, endemic to the island. An exclusively Amazonian clade comprising mostly Orbignya-like species diverged c. 15 Mya, later yielding the Cerrado lineage mentioned above.
Colonization events from the Choco region back to the Amazon might have led to a widespread clade comprising A. maripa, A. allenii from Panama and A. attaleoides from the central Amazon (Fig. 3). A mostly Choco clade colonized the Brazilian Amazon again c. 15 Mya yielding the clade comprising A. phalerata and A. insignis there. Colonization events back and forth from the Choco to the Amazon might have led to the widespread clade comprising A. butyracea and A. insignis from Colombia from 10 Mya onward. A mostly Choco-region clade comprising A. nucifera and A. allenii from Colombia that is sister to A. cohune and A. guacuyule originated around 16 Mya. Another colonization from the Choco region to the Amazon occurred around 10 Mya, leading to the clade comprising A. ferruginea, A. racemosa and A. colenda. Colonizations back and forth between Choco and Amazon are represented in Figure 3 with filled red circles and were considered every time there was a change from Choco (Area B) to Amazon (Area D) or the reverse.
DISCUSSION
Attalea s.l. is well established as a monophyletic group (Meerow et al., 2009, 2014), which our expanded data set corroborates. In our trees, Allagoptera is resolved as sister to Attalea in contrast to Meerow et al. (2014), who recovered a sister relationship with Cocos, although with weak support (PP = 0.7). Although the support for the relationship between Attalea and Allagoptera is strong, caution should be observed because the outgroup chosen here is a small sample of the subtribe. Also, Parajubaea, the strongly supported sister of Allagoptera in Meerow et al. (2009, 2014), was not included.
We can recognize four distinct groups in Attalea that roughly correspond to the four previously

recognized genera, but they are not monophyletic. Thus there is not strong evidence supporting the separation of Attalea into the traditional segregate genera. These four groups have been distinguished by morphological characters related to the staminate flower (Glassman, 1999; Dransfield et al., 2005), but our results suggest that these characters are homoplastic, as suggested by Dransfield et al. (2008). A new search for good morphological characters for lineages of Attalea in the light of our molecular phylogenetic analysis would be worthwhile. There is also evidence that environmental constraints at the local scale including dispersal limitation, topography and soil clay content have impacted this clade, as two Attalea spp. in the central Amazon are segregated along those environmental gradients (Freitas et al., 2012).
The lack of resolution and weak support in parts of the tree and the evidence of recombination probably represent the effects of rapid divergence and hybridization. All would increase the phylogenetic similarity between putative species decreasing the tree resolution and possibly lead to over-description of species based on solely morphological characters. Some well-known cases of hybridization, such as A. speciosa 9 A. vitrivir (Henderson, 1995; Glassman, 1999) and A. oleifera 9 A. funifera (= A. 9 pindobassu Bondar, in the Atlantic forest), were not confirmed by our data. The same might be expected for the event involving A. oleifera and A. pindobassu [referred to as A. burretiana Bondar 9 A. acaulis Burret in Bondar (1942) and A. burretiana 9 A. funifera in Glassman (1999)]. Overall, we were conservative in accepting recombination events and we are aware we have sampled a small portion of the genome of these species and cannot rule out recombination as a major contributor to the lack of resolution. A more inclusive study, focused at the population level, would be a sensible next step to discover within-group relationships.
There is a clear split between the monophyletic Atlantic forest clade and the species occurring in the remaining areas (node 2; Fig. 1). Based on the chronogram and in the AAR, our results corroborate the evidence that the most recent ancestor of Attalea is an Atlantic forest clade (node 1 in Fig. 3) (i.e. Meerow et al., 2014) and is in line with the hypothesis that its centre of origin was in the Atlantic forest. However, this remains a hypothesis, as the likelihood score (0.43) in the AAR is quite low.
Most of the divergence in Attalea, including the origin of the three main clades, happened in the last 20 Myr. This recent divergence coincides with major shifts in South American climatic and geographical configuration, such as the development of the Pebas Lake system in the western Amazon (Hoorn et al.,

© 2016 The Linnean Society of London, Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society, 2016

10 C. FREITAS ET AL.
© 2016 The Linnean Society of London, Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society, 2016

ATTALEA: PHYLOGENETICS AND BIOGEOGRAPHY 11
Figure 3. Maximum clade credibility tree showing the MCMC chronogram for Attalea performed in BEAST with the ancestral area reconstruction. Values on the nodes are likelihood support for the node and letters correspond to the areas assigned for each species in Lagrange. Central America including Greater Antilles (A), Choco including Colombian and Venezuelan valleys (B), Andes (C), Amazon (D), Cerrado (E) and Atlantic Forest (F). Madagascar (G) is omitted from the map. Grey blocks mark the time frames set for the analysis: 62­42, 42­25, 25­11 and 11 Mya to the present. Colours represent the groups in Attalea previously recognized as independent genera: Orbignya (blue), Maximiliana (orange), Scheelea (red) and Attalea s.s. (green). Numbers and circles in bold red represent clades mentioned in the main text to help readers to follow results. The time scale is shown in millions of years.

2010a), sequences of uplift in the Andes (Hartley, 2003; Roig-Jun~ent et al., 2006) and the increase in aridity across the continent (Le Roux, 2012). The increase in aridity was a result of climatic changes driven by geological events such as the successive uplift of the Andes from south to north and the opening of the Drake Passage from shallow water (43 Mya) through to full flux (30 Mya), leading to climatic changes inland (Barker & Burrell, 1977; Scher & Martin, 2006) from a warm and humid to a drier and cooler climate. This change drove the replacement of the tropical rain forest by a much drier forest and opened the possibility of colonization from the wetter Amazon to the drier Cerrado (Pennington et al., 2004).
The Cerrado flora is probably recent and derived from adjacent biomes, including rain forest, as a study in Fabaceae suggests (Schrire, Lavin & Lewis, 2005). Evidence for this is also found for Viguiera (Schilling et al., 2000), Manihot (Chacon et al., 2008) and Astrocaryum (Roncal et al., 2013). Indeed, the Cerrado and the adjacent rain forest have high floristic affinities: c. 80% of Cerrado woody species belong to rain-forest genera (Pennington, Richardson & Lavin, 2006), which could be explained by a transition between these two biomes, also supported by a dated phylogenetic analysis of Andira (Simon et al., 2009). There is indirect evidence of colonization of the newly formed dry formations across South America followed by in situ diversification. This was reported for some genera typically found in the current seasonally dry tropical forests including Coursetia (20 Mya), Poissonia (18 Mya) and Ruprechtia (8­12 Mya) (Pennington et al., 2004).
The split between two Amazonian clades (central and western Choco) c. 20 Mya (node 2, Fig. 3) coincides with the development of the Pebas aquatic system, which is hypothesized to have covered most of the western Amazon basin (Hoorn et al., 2010a). The Orbignya-like clade comprises species from the central Amazon, the Cerrado and A. crassispatha, endemic to Hispaniola. The exclusively Amazonian Orbignya-like clade originated c. 15 Mya, with colonization events from the Choco back to the Amazon (filled red circles; Fig. 3). This back-and-forth colonization led to a widespread clade including species

once classified as Maximiliana (e.g. A. maripa, A. allenii from Panama and A. attaleoides from the central Amazon basin). Colonization events between Choco and the Amazon and a rapid increase in cladogenesis c. 10 Mya were also found in Astrocaryum (Roncal et al., 2013). Around the same period, an increase in diversification rates was found in Geonoma (Arecaceae; Roncal et al., 2011) and Guatteria (Annonaceae; Erkens et al., 2007).
The Scheelea-like clade comprises species from the western Amazon and northern Andean valleys and two widespread species (A. butyracea and A. phalerata, which are paraphyletic). The species shared between Choco and the Amazon may reflect the absence of a major barrier for dispersal until c. 10­ 5 Mya when the northern Andes rose to their full height (Hartley, 2003). After the full uplift and subsequent formation of the drier inter-Andean valleys this connection would have been broken.
Our analysis agrees with the hypothesis that A. crassispatha colonized Hispaniola c. 18 Mya, much later than when the Great Antilles Avian Ridge (GAAR) is thought to have existed, and much earlier than the timing traditionally accepted for Panama channel closure. In fact, comparing divergence dates between phylogenetic analyses, Cody et al. (2010) found that divergence dates between Central American and South American clades were older for plants than for animals, indicating that plants were less dispersal-limited and colonized South America much earlier than the supposed Panama Chanel closure timing. On the other hand, the GAAR, which is thought to have connected the Greater Antilles and South America from 35­ 32 Mya, probably allowed biotic interchange between those two landmasses (Iturralde-Vinent & MacPhee, 1999). After this event, the Caribbean islands are thought to have become isolated from South America until c. 5­2 Mya when the Panama Channel finally closed (Bacon et al., 2013), indirectly linking these two regions again. There is evidence of an earlier tectonic collision between South America and Panama c. 23­25 Mya (Farris et al., 2011), which is in line with evidence of a more complex history between North, Central and South America, with biotic interchange occurring in pulses at c. 23­20

© 2016 The Linnean Society of London, Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society, 2016

12 C. FREITAS ET AL.

and 8­6 Mya (Bacon et al., 2015). Since A. crassispatha diverged from the Amazonian Orbignya-like clade c. 18 Mya when no connection is thought to have existed between the Greater Antilles and South America, a long-distance dispersal event is likely, as postulated by Cody et al. (2010). PostGAAR colonization by rafting (Fabre et al., 2014) is also possible.
Attalea is an extremely important genus not only economically, but also as a cultural expression of the people of the American tropics, and humans are likely to have partially shaped the distribution of Attalea. Despite the absence of literature regarding the influence of pre-Colombian and modern people on the distribution of the genus, Levis et al. (2012) found that the density and richness of useful trees, including palms, were artificially increased near main rivers in the Amazon. This may have significantly impacted the distribution of Attalea and promoted hybridization events resulting from secondary contact between formerly vicariant species. Although we cannot rule out the influence of humans on the distribution of Attalea, in this study we conclude that most of the divergence within the three main clades happened in the last 10 Myr (Fig. 1) roughly the same time as the arrival of humans (11 Mya) and is consistent with evidence of a recent burst in diversification rates for Meliaceae (Koenen et al., 2015). This recent increase in divergence is also consistent with the increase of aridity and the consolidation of the dry diagonal including the Chaco, Cerrado and Caatinga (Pennington et al., 2004). Nevertheless, deciduous-forest lineages of Meliaceae did the opposite of what we are suggesting for Attalea (i.e. they migrated from drier ecosystems to tropical rain forests). In Attalea, many species occurring in the cerrado such as A. vitrivir, A. brejinhoensis and A. eichleri (Drude) A.J.Hend. are younger than and sister to Amazonian clades, indicating colonization from Amazonia to the new niche formed by the dry diagonal of South America.
Finally, some Attalea spp. appear to be polyphyletic, the most striking cases being A. allenii, A. insignis, A. phalerata and A. butyracea. Attalea allenii from Colombia is sister to A. nucifera from the inter-Andean Valleys, whereas A. allenii from Panama is sister to A. attaleoides from the central Amazon. The only support (PP = 93) for monophyly between the two samples of A. allenii is in the WRKY16 alignment (considering that we were not able to amplify those two samples for WRKY21). The distance between these two samples is probably real, as both clades are resolved with high support in the MCC chronogram. Perhaps this pattern reflects the Andean uplift segregating the older inter-Andean­ Colombian clade (9.4 Mya) from the remaining

Panama­central Amazon clade (3.4 Mya). Another possibility is a hybridization event between A. allenii and other species that we were not able to detect.
The polyphyletic species A. phalerata and A. insignis resolve in the Scheelea-like clade, which split into two subclades c. 16 Mya (Fig. 2). Attalea insignis segregates between geological formations (samples 67, 69 and 74 on an older formation and samples 56, 72 and 95 on a younger formation). The species is restricted to the alluvial terraces in the western Amazon; its isolation there is consistent with the presence of a geological feature known as the Purus arch, which is hypothesized to have divided the Amazon and Solimo~es drainage basins (Wanderley-Filho et al., 2010). This split is also consistent with a geological formation reported by Higgins et al. (2012) that is supposed to have separated the Pebas and the Ißca formation in the western Amazon and is evidenced by significant floristic differences between those two areas (Higgins et al., 2011).
The substantial problems with species delimitation that we have revealed in this study add another layer of complexity to tracing the history of Attalea. In A. butyracea and A. phalerata, two widespread and polyphyletic species, taxonomic investigation is needed, although morphology is consistent throughout samples covering their distribution arc. Additionally, in the Kew Checklist the two species are divided into 13 and six different taxa, respectively (see Supporting Information, Table S8 for correspondence). Cryptic biological species may well be at the root of the problem; further investigation should focus on the population level coupled with other sources of data to help reveal the species delimitations and the processes that yielded this complexity.
CONCLUSIONS
Using an inclusive sample of the genus, we reject the monophyly of the previous recognized segregate genera within Attalea. Three main clades can be recognized; they roughly correspond to previously recognized but artificial genera. These clades, however, largely lie in ecogeographical biomes, such as the Atlantic forest, Amazon, Cerrado and northern Mesoamerican regions. The Atlantic forest clade, sister to the remaining two mostly Amazonian clades, is consistent with the previously proposed Atlantic forest origin for Attalea. An alternative scenario of a widespread clade that went through geologically induced vicariance is possible. The geologically recent development of dry forest biomes also played a significant role in the speciation of Attalea. The polyphyly of some species (e.g. A. allenii, A. insignis, A. butyracea and A. phalerata), the evidence of

© 2016 The Linnean Society of London, Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society, 2016

ATTALEA: PHYLOGENETICS AND BIOGEOGRAPHY 13

recombination events and the overall low resolution at recent nodes are impediments to finalizing a stable taxonomy for the genus. Although it is clear that more effort is needed to resolve interspecific relationships in Attalea, this study offers a significant starting point for future progress in the systematics and biogeography of this important group.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
C.G.F. wishes to thank the Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq) for financial support (481297/2011-1 granted to F.R.C.C.), Coordenacßa~o de Aperfeicßoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior/Programa de Pos Doutorado no Exterior (Processo no. 3138-13-5) for a Postdoc fellowship granted to C.G.F., and Flavia Santana, Thomas Couvreur, Gloria Galeano, Rodrigo Bernal, Finn Borchsenius, Thaise Emilio, Henrik Balslev, Sarah Reis and Camila Duarte for sample donations.
REFERENCES
Anderson AB, May PH, Balick MJ. 1991. The subsidy from nature: palm forests, peasantry, and development on an Amazon frontier. New York: Columbia University Press.
Asmussen C, Dransfield J, Deickmann V, Barfod AS, Pintaud J, Baker WJ. 2006. A new subfamily classification of the palm family (Arecaceae): evidence from plastid DNA phylogeny. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 151: 15­38.
Bacon CD, Mora A, Wagner WL, Jaramillo CA. 2013. Testing geological models of evolution of the Isthmus of Panama in a phylogenetic framework. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 171: 287­300.
Bacon CD, Silvestro D, Jaramillo C, Smith BT, Chakrabarty P, Antonelli A. 2015. Biological evidence supports an early and complex emergence of the Isthmus of Panama. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 112: 1­6.
Baker W, Savolainen V, Asmussen C, Chase MW, Dransfield J, Forest F, Harley M, Uhl N, Wilkinson M. 2009. Complete generic-level phylogenetic analyses of palms (Arecaceae) with comparisons of supertree and supermatrix approaches. Systematic Biology 58: 240­256.
Baker WJ, Couvreur TLP. 2013a. Global biogeography and diversification of palms sheds light on the evolution of tropical lineages. Historical biogeography. Journal of Biogeography 20: 1­12.
Baker WJ, Couvreur TLP. 2013b. Global biogeography and diversification of palms sheds light on the evolution of tropical lineages. II. Diversification history and origin of regional assemblages. Journal of Biogeography 40: 286­298.
Balslev H, Grandez C, Zambrana P, Møller AL, Hansen SL. 2008. Palmas (Arecaceae) utiles en los alrededores de

Iquitos, Amazonia Peruana. Revista Peruana de Biologia 15: 121­132. Barker PF, Burrell J. 1977. The opening of Drake Passage. Marine Geology 25: 15­34. Barrett CF, Baker WJ, Comer JR, Conran JG, Lahmeyer SC, Leebens-Mack JH, Li J, Lim GS, MayfieldJones DR, Perez L, Medina J, Pires JC, Santos C, Stevenson D, Zomlefer WB, Davis JI. 2015. Plastid genomes reveal support for deep phylogenetic relationships and extensive rate variation among palms and other commelinid monocots. New Phytologist 209: 855­870. Bernal R, Galeano G. 2010. Uses and commercial prospects for the wine palm, Attalea butyracea, in Colombia. Ethnobotany 8: 255­268. Bjorholm S, Svenning J, Baker W. 2006. Historical legacies in the geographical diversity patterns of New World palm (Arecaceae) subfamilies. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 151: 113­125. Bondar G. 1942. New palms of Bahia. Publications of the Field Museum of Natural History. Botanical Series 22: 457­463. Cannon SB, Mitra A, Baumgarten A, Young ND, May G. 2004. The roles of segmental and tandem gene duplication in the evolution of large gene families in Arabidopsis thaliana. BMC Plant Biology 4: 1­21. Chacon J, Madrin~an S, Debouck D, Rodriguez F, Tohme J. 2008. Phylogenetic patterns in the genus Manihot (Euphorbiaceae) inferred from analyses of nuclear and chloroplast DNA regions. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 49: 260­267. Cody S, Richardson JE, Rull V, Ellis C, Pennington RT. 2010. The great American biotic interchange revisited. Ecography 33: 326­332. Couvreur TLP, Forest F, Baker W. 2011. Origin and global diversification patterns of tropical rain forests: inferences from a complete genus-level phylogeny of palms. BMC Biology 9: 44. Crisp MD, Trewick S, Cook LG. 2011. Hypothesis testing in biogeography. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 26: 66­72. Darriba D, Taboada GL, Doallo R, Posada D. 2012. jModelTest 2: more models, new heuristics and parallel computing. Nature Methods 9: 772. Doyle J, Doyle JL. 1987. A rapid DNA isolation procedure for small quantities of fresh leaf tissue. Phytochemical Bulletin, Botanical Society of America 19: 11­15. Dransfield J, Uhl N, Asmussen C, Baker W. 2005. A new phylogenetic classification of the palm family, Arecaceae. Kew Bulletin 60: 559­569. Dransfield J, Uhl N, Asmussen C, Baker W, Harley M, Lewis CE. 2008. Genera palmarum. Kew: Royal Botanic Gardens. Drummond AJ, Suchard MA, Xie D, Rambaut A. 2012. Bayesian phylogenetics with BEAUti and the BEAST 1.7. Molecular Biology and Evolution 29: 1969­1973. Eiserhardt WL, Pintaud JC, Asmussen-Lange C, Hahn WJ, Bernal R, Balslev H, Borchsenius F. 2011a. Phylogeny and divergence times of Bactridinae (Arecaceae, Palmae) based on plastid and nuclear DNA sequences. Taxon 23: 1­14.

© 2016 The Linnean Society of London, Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society, 2016

14 C. FREITAS ET AL.

Eiserhardt WL, Svenning JC, Kissling WD, Balslev H. 2011b. Geographical ecology of the palms (Arecaceae): determinants of diversity and distributions across spatial scales. Annals of Botany 108: 1391­1416.
Erkens RHJ, Chatrou LW, Maas JW, van der Niet T, Savolainen V. 2007. A rapid diversification of rainforest trees (Guatteria; Annonaceae) following dispersal from Central into South America. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 44: 399­411.
Fabre PH, Vilstrup JT, Raghavan M, Sarkissian CD, Willerslev E, Douzery EJP, Orlando L. 2014. Rodents of the Caribbean: origin and diversification of hutias unraveled by next-generation museomics. Biology Letters 10: 20140266.
Farris DW, Jaramillo C, Bayona G, Restrepo-Moreno SA, Montes C, Cardona A, Mora A, Speakman RJ, Glascock MD, Valencia V. 2011. Fracturing of the Panamanian Isthmus during initial collision with South America. Geology 39: 1007­1010.
Freitas C, Costa FRC, Svenning JC, Balslev H. 2012. Topographic separation of two sympatric palms in the central Amazon ­ does dispersal play a role? Acta Oecologica 39: 128­135.
Futey MK, Gandolfo MA, Zamaloa MC, Cuneo R, Cladera G. 2012. Arecaceae fossil fruits from the Paleocene of Patagonia, Argentina. The Botanical Review 78: 205­234.
Glassman SF. 1999. A taxonomic treatment of the palm subtribe Attaleinae (tribe Cocoeae) 59. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Hartley A. 2003. Andean uplift and climate change. Journal of the Geological Society 160: 7­10.
Henderson A. 1995. The palms of the Amazon. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Higgins MA, Asner GP, Perez E, Elespuru N, Tuomisto H, Ruokolainen K, Alonso A. 2012. Use of Landsat and SRTM data to detect broad-scale biodiversity patterns in northwestern Amazonia. Remote Sensing 4: 2401­2418.
Higgins MA, Ruokolainen K, Tuomisto H, Llerena N, Cardenas G, Phillips OL, Vasquez R, Rasanen M. 2011. Geological control of floristic composition in Amazonian forests. Journal of Biogeography 38: 2136­2149.
Hoorn C, Roddaz M, Dino R, Soares E, Uba C, OchoaLozano D, Mapes R. 2010a. The Amazonian Craton and its influence on past fluvial systems (Mesozoic­Cenozoic, Amazonia). In: Hoorn C, Wesselingh F, eds. Amazonia: landscape and species evolution. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 103­122.
Hoorn C, Wesselingh FP, ter Steege H, Bermudez MA, Mora A, Sevink J, Sanmartin I, Sanchez-Meseguer A, Anderson CL, Figueiredo JP, Jaramillo C, Riff D, Negri FR, Hooghiemstra H, Lundberg J, Stadler T, Sarkinen T, Antonelli A. 2010b. Amazonia through time: Andean uplift, climate change, landscape evolution, and biodiversity. Science 330: 927­931.
Hopkins MJG. 2007. Modeling the known and unknown plant biodiversity of the Amazon Basin. Journal of Biogeography 34: 1400­1411.

Iturralde-Vinent M, MacPhee RDE. 1999. Paleogeography of the Caribbean region: implications for Cenozoic biogeography. Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History 238: 1­95.
Jordan TE, Farjat AD, Echavarri L, Idleman BD, Reynolds JH. 2005. Age, distribution, tectonics, and eustatic controls of the Paranense and Caribbean marine transgressions in southern Bolivia and Argentina. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 19: 495­512.
Katoh K, Misawa K, Kuma K, Miyata T. 2002. MAFFT: a novel method for rapid multiple sequence alignment based on fast Fourier transform. Nucleic Acids Research 30: 3059­3066.
Koenen EJM, Clarkson JJ, Pennington TD, Chatrou LW. 2015. Recently evolved diversity and convergent radiations of rainforest mahoganies (Meliaceae) shed new light on the origins of rainforest hyperdiversity. New Phytologist 207: 327­339.
Latrubesse EM, Cozzuol M, da Silva-Caminha SAF, Rigsby CA, Absy ML, Jaramillo C. 2010. The Late Miocene paleogeography of the Amazon Basin and the evolution of the Amazon River system. Earth-Science Reviews 99: 99­124.
Le Roux JP. 2012. A review of Tertiary climate changes in southern South America and the Antarctic Peninsula. Part 1: oceanic conditions. Sedimentary Geology 247: 1­20.
Levis C, Souza P, Schietti J, Emilio T, Pinto J, Clement CR, Costa FRC. 2012. Historical human footprint on modern tree species composition in the Purus­Madeira interfluve, Central Amazonia. PLoS ONE 7: e48559.
Martin D, Rybicki E. 2000. RDP: detection of recombination amongst aligned sequences. Bioinformatics 16: 562­ 563.
Martin DP, Lemey P, Lott M, Moulton V, Posada D, Lefeuvre P. 2010. RDP3: a flexible and fast computer program for analyzing recombination. Bioinformatics 26: 2462­ 2463.
Maynard Smith J. 1992. Analyzing the mosaic structure of genes. Journal of Molecular Evolution 34: 126­129.
Meerow AW, Noblick L, Borrone JW, Couvreur TLP, Mauro-Herrera M, Hahn WJ, Kuhn DN, Nakamura K, Oleas NH, Schnell RJ. 2009. Phylogenetic analysis of seven WRKY genes across the palm subtribe Attaleinae (Arecaceae) identifies Syagrus as sister group of the coconut. PLoS ONE 4: e7353.
Meerow AW, Noblick L, Salas-Leiva DE, Sanchez V, Francisco-Ortega J, Jestrow B, Nakamura K. 2014. Phylogeny and historical biogeography of the cocosoid palms (Arecaceae, Arecoideae, Cocoseae) inferred from sequences of six WRKY gene family loci. Cladistics 31: 1­ 26.
Miller MA, Pfeiffer W, Schwartz T 2010. Creating the CIPRES Science Gateway for inference of large phylogenetic trees. Proceedings of the Gateway Computing Environments Workshop (GCE), 14 Nov. 2010, New Orleans, LA, 1­8.
Muller DK. 2005. SeqState. Applied Bioinformatics 4: 65­69.

© 2016 The Linnean Society of London, Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society, 2016

ATTALEA: PHYLOGENETICS AND BIOGEOGRAPHY 15

Myers N, Mittermeier RA, Mittermeier CG, Fonseca GAB, Kent J. 2000. Biodiversity hotspots for conservation priorities. Nature 403: 853­858.
Noblick L. 2013. Leaflet anatomy verifies relationships within Syagrus (Arecaceae) and aids in identification. PhytoKeys 26: 75­99.
Noblick L, Meerow A. 2015. The transfer of the genus Lytocaryum to Syagrus. Palms 59: 57­62.
Oliveira-Filho AT, Ratter JA. 2002. Vegetation physiognomies and woody flora of the cerrado biome. In: Oliveira PS, Marquis RJ, eds. The cerrados of Brazil: ecology and natural history of a Neotropical savanna. New York: Columbia University Press, 91­120.
Padidam M, Sawyer S, Fauquet CM. 1999. Possible emergence of new geminiviruses by frequent recombination. Virology 265: 218­225.
Pennington RT, Lavin M, Prado DE, Pendry CA, Pell SK, Butterworth CA. 2004. Historical climate change and speciation: neotropical seasonally dry forest plants show patterns of both Tertiary and Quaternary diversification. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 359: 515­538.
Pennington RT, Richardson JE, Lavin M. 2006. Insights into the historical construction of species-rich biomes from dated plant phylogenies, neutral ecological theory and phylogenetic community structure. New Phytologist 172: 605­ 616.
Pinedo AS, Martins RC, de Oliveira RC, Gomes SM. 2016. Leaf anatomy in Allagoptera (Arecaceae). Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society doi:10.1111/boj.12439.
Pintaud JC. 2008. An overview of the taxonomy of Attalea (Arecaceae). Revista Peruana de Biologia 15: 53­62.
Ree RH, Smith SA. 2008. Maximum likelihood inference of geographic range evolution by dispersal, local extinction, and cladogenesis. Systematic Biology 57: 4­14.
Ribeiro JF, Walter BMT. 1998. Fitofisionomias do bioma cerrado. In: Sano SM, Almeida SP, eds. Cerrado: ambiente e flora. Brasilia: EMBRAPA, 91­166.
Roig-Jun~ent S, Dominguez MC, Flores GE, Mattoni C. 2006. Biogeographic history of South American arid lands: a view from its arthropods using TASS analysis. Journal of Arid Environments 66: 404­420.
Roncal J, Blach-Overgaard A, Borchsenius F, Balslev H, Svenning JC. 2011. A dated phylogeny complements macroecological analysis to explain the diversity patterns in Geonoma (Arecaceae). Biotropica 43: 324­334.
Roncal J, Borchsenius F, Asmussen C, Balslev H. 2010. Divergence times in the tribe Geonomateae (Arecaceae) coincide with Tertiary geological events. In: Seberg O, Peterson AT, Barfod A, Davis AM, eds. Diversity, phylogeny and evolution in the monocotyledons. Aarhus: Arhus University Press, 245­265.
Roncal J, Francisco-Ortega J, Asmussen CB, Lewis CE. 2005. Molecular phylogenetics of tribe Geonomeae (Arecaceae) using nuclear DNA sequences of

phosphoribulokinase and RNA polymerase II. Systematic Botany 30: 275­283. Roncal J, Kahn F, Millan B, Couvreur TL, Pintaud JC. 2013. Cenozoic colonization and diversification patterns of tropical American palms: evidence from Astrocaryum (Arecaceae). Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 171: 120­ 139. Ronquist F, Teslenko M, van der Mark P, Ayres DL, Darling A, Hohna S, Larget B, Liu L, Suchard MA, Huelsenbeck JP. 2012. MrBayes 3.2: efficient Bayesian phylogenetic inference and model choice across a large model space. Systematic Biology 61: 539­542. Ross CA, Liu Y, Shen QJ. 2007. The WRKY gene family in rice Oryza sativa. Journal of Integrative Plant Biology 49: 827­842. Scher HD, Martin EE. 2006. Timing and climatic consequences of the opening of Drake Passage. Science 312: 428­ 430. Schilling EE, Da Costa FB, Lopes NP, Heise PJ. 2000. Brazilian species of Vigueira (Asteraceae) exhibit low levels of ITS sequence variation. Edinburgh Journal of Botany 57: 323­332. Schrire BD, Lavin M, Lewis GP. 2005. Global distribution patterns of the Leguminosae: insights from recent phylogenies. In: Friis I, Balslev H, eds. Plant diversity and complexity patterns: local, regional, and global dimensions. Proceedings of an International Symposium. Copenhagen: Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters, 367­422. Simmons MP, Ochoterena H. 2000. Gaps as characters in sequence-based phylogenetic analyses. Systematic Biology 49: 369­381. Simon MF, Grether R, de Queiroz LP, Skema C, Pennington RT, Hughes CE. 2009. Recent assembly of the cerrado, a Neotropical plant diversity hotspot, by in situ evolution of adaptations to fire. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106: 20359­20364. Terborgh J. 1992. Maintenance of diversity in tropical forests. Biotropica 24: 283­292. Tomlinson P. 2006. The uniqueness of palms. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 151: 5­14. Wanderley-Filho J, Eiras J, Cunha P, van der Ven P. 2010. The Paleozoic Solimo~es and Amazonas basins and the Acre foreland basin of Brazil. In: Hoorn C, Wesselingh FP, eds. Amazonia: landscape and species evolution. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 29­37. WCSP. 2015. World checklist of selected plant families. Kew: Royal Botanic Gardens. Wu KL, Guo ZJ, Wang HH, Li J. 2005. The WRKY family of transcription factors in rice and arabidopsis and their origins. DNA Research 12: 9­26. Zak MR, Cabido M. 2002. Spatial patterns of the Chaco vegetation of central Argentina: integration of remote sensing and phytosociology. Applied Vegetation Science 5: 213­226.

© 2016 The Linnean Society of London, Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society, 2016

16 C. FREITAS ET AL.
SUPPORTING INFORMATION Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article: Figure S1. Bayesian 50% majority rule consensus tree of Attalea spp. and outgroup for the WRKY6 nuclear marker. Figure S2. Bayesian 50% majority rule consensus tree of Attalea spp. and outgroup for the WRKY7 nuclear marker. Figure S3. Bayesian 50% majority rule consensus tree of Attalea spp. and outgroup for the WRKY12 nuclear marker. Figure S4. Bayesian 50% majority rule consensus tree of Attalea spp. and outgroup for the WRKY16 nuclear marker. Figure S5. Bayesian 50% majority rule consensus tree of Attalea spp. and outgroup for the WRKY19 nuclear marker. Figure S6. Bayesian 50% majority rule consensus tree of Attalea spp. and outgroup for the WRKY21 nuclear marker. Figure S7. Maximum clade credibility tree showing the MCMC chronogram for Attalea. Figure S8. Maximum clade credibility tree showing the MCMC chronogram for Attalea. Table S1. Silica-dried samples from fresh collected and donated samples of the genus Attalea used to extract DNA. Table S2. Number of Attalea samples included for each marker and final supermatrix with the size of the fragment amplified. Table S3. Voucher information and GenBank accession numbers for Attalea samples included in the study. Table S4. WRKY primer sequences (50?30). Table S5. Recombination events showing the number of methods supporting and the decision making towards the acceptance of each event for each marker with recombination signs. Table S6. Dispersal cost matrices used as an input to Lagrange for ancestral area reconstruction showing each time frame at the headings of each table section. Table S7. Dates for crown nodes of well-supported clades in the MCC tree. Table S8. The 125 records retrieved from the Kew Checklist showing the nomenclature correspondence between this study and the Kew Checklist for Attalea.
© 2016 The Linnean Society of London, Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society, 2016

