Seediscussions,stats,andauthorprofilesforthispublicationat:https://www.researchgate.net/publication/43274100
FruitabscissionbyPhysalisspeciesasdefense againstfrugivory
ArticleinEntomologiaExperimentalisetApplicata·January2009
DOI:10.1111/j.1570-7458.2008.00792.x·Source:OAI

CITATIONS
2

READS
43

4authors,including:
NicoleBenda UnitedStatesDepartmentofAgriculture 11PUBLICATIONS41CITATIONS
SEEPROFILE
FredGould NorthCarolinaStateUniversity 338PUBLICATIONS9,619CITATIONS
SEEPROFILE

CobySchal NorthCarolinaStateUniversity 423PUBLICATIONS5,762CITATIONS
SEEPROFILE

Someoftheauthorsofthispublicationarealsoworkingontheserelatedprojects:
PopulationGeneticsofBedBugsViewproject

AllcontentfollowingthispagewasuploadedbyCobySchalon24January2017.
Theuserhasrequestedenhancementofthedownloadedfile.Allin-textreferencesunderlinedinblueareaddedtotheoriginaldocument andarelinkedtopublicationsonResearchGate,lettingyouaccessandreadthemimmediately.

Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Abstract

DOI: 10.1111/j.1570-7458.2008.00792.x
Fruit abscission by Physalis species as defense against frugivory
Nicole D. Benda1*, Cavell Brownie2, Coby Schal3 & Fred Gould3
1USDA-ARS Center for Medical, Veterinary, and Agricultural Entomology, 1600-1700 SW 23rd Drive, Gainesville, FL 32608, USA, 2Department of Statistics, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA, and 3Department of Entomology and W.M. Keck Center for Behavioral Biology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA
Accepted: 5 September 2008
Key words: caterpillar foraging, host plant location, Heliothis subflexa, Heliothis virescens, specialist behavior, plant architecture, Lepidoptera, Noctuidae, Solanaceae
Fruit abscission as a response to herbivory is well-documented in many plant species, but its effect on further damage by mobile herbivores that survive fruit abscission is relatively unstudied. Physalis plants (Solanaceae) abscise fruit containing feeding larvae of their main frugivore, Heliothis subflexa Guenée (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae), a specialist moth.We tested the ability of H. subflexa larvae placed under the plant canopy to find and climb onto two architecturally different Physalis species. Physalis pubescens L., a low, shrub-like, spreading plant, abscises its fruit at a higher rate than Physalis angulata L., a tall arborescent plant. As a result, small larvae are more often dropped from P. pubescens. Third and fifth instars located P. pubescens faster and with a higher probability than P. angulata. Although fifth instars outperformed third-instar caterpillars at finding P. angulata, P. pubescens was located equally fast by the two instars. Heliothis subflexa located Physalis plants more successfully and more quickly than a close relative, the generalist Heliothis virescens Fabricius. The higher fruit abscission rates in P. pubescens may be an evolved response to its greater susceptibility to searching caterpillars.

Introduction
Many plants abscise leaves, flowers, and fruit damaged by herbivory. Because herbivore-damaged fruit may not develop properly, abscission may be an efficient way for a plant to minimize its losses by not investing further in the damaged fruit. When the herbivore is dislodged from the plant along with the abscised fruit, abscission can additionally be viewed as a direct defense against the herbivore. Many studies have documented the phenomenon of herbivores falling to the ground with the abscised plant part (Stephenson, 1981, and references within). However, the fate of these herbivores has rarely been investigated, in part because (1) relatively sessile stages of the herbivores may be involved (e.g., eggs, galls, and leaf miners) (Stiling et al., 1991; Pellmyr & Huth, 1994; Espirito-Santo & Fernandes, 2002), and (2) many herbivores can complete
*Correspondence: Nicole D. Benda, USDA-ARS Center for Medical, Veterinary, and Agricultural Entomology, 1600-1700 SW 23rd Drive, Gainesville, FL 32608, USA. E-mail: Nicole.Benda@ars.usda.gov

development within the abscised plant part (Janzen, 1971; Cross, 1973; Racette et al., 1992; Toy et al., 1992; Minchinton & Dalby-Ball, 2001) (but see investigations of a few sessile insects: Dohanian, 1944; Fernandes & Whitham, 1989; Waddell et al., 2001).
Heliothis subflexa Guenée (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae) is a frugivorous specialist, feeding solely on some Physalis species (Solanaceae) (Brazzel et al., 1953; Bateman, 2006), and is the main frugivore of most natural North American populations of Physalis. Heliothis subflexa larvae feed on the berry-like Physalis fruit surrounded by a lantern-like calyx. These two parts, the calyx and the berry inside, are hereafter referred to as the Physalis fruit. Some plants in the genus Physalis drop their fruit in response to herbivory by H. subflexa. If the fruit abscises while the larva is within the calyx, the larva falls to the ground along with the fruit. Preliminary experiments have found that 14 and 22% of abscised fruits of Physalis angulata L.and Physalis pubescens L., respectively, contained larvae (JL Petzold, unpubl.). Because larvae must feed on multiple (ca. 3) fruit to complete development, most dislodged larvae on the ground must

© 2008 The Netherlands Entomological Society Entomologia Experimentalis et Applicata 130: 21­27, 2009 No claim to original US government works Journal compilation © 2008 The Netherlands Entomological Society

21

22 Benda et al.

re-locate the host plant, climb back onto it, and enter a calyx. The ability of the larva to do this may be affected by (1) the architecture of the plant and its understory landscape (e.g., weeds), (2) the size of the larva, and (3) the larva's behavioral response to being on the ground, under the plant canopy.
Physalis species vary considerably in general architecture, from low spreading forms to tall arborescent forms. Physalis pubescens and P. angulata have a marked difference in architecture. Physalis pubescens is shrub-like, with many major branches drooped downward and much of the canopy close to and often touching the ground, while P. angulata is arborescent, with the stem and major branches upright. The architecture of both species is somewhat plastic, responding to density of surrounding vegetation and light competition, but the typical forms described above predominate in natural populations. Natural populations of these two species are often infested by H. subflexa (Sisterson, 1997; Bateman, 2006) and these two species were used preferentially by H. subflexa in common garden studies in North Carolina, USA, (Benda, 2007) and Jalisco, Mexico (Bateman, 2006).
In addition to differences in plant architecture, these two Physalis species differ in their rates of fruit abscission. Physalis pubescens shed fruit more readily in response to frugivory than P. angulata (JL Petzold, unpubl.). Physalis pubescens also abscise ripe fruit more quickly than P. angulata. These differences in abscission patterns lead to much younger (and hence, smaller) larvae being dropped by P. pubescens than by P. angulata (ML Bateman, unpubl.). In general, P. pubescens also produce more abscised, intact fruit per plant than P. angulata.
To determine the effectiveness of the abscission response at reducing herbivore impact in P. angulata and P. pubescens, we examined the ability of H. subflexa larvae to re-locate and climb onto both plants. Although the two Physalis species may differ in various traits that may affect herbivore performance (e.g., chemistry, color, and pubescence), we hypothesized that their divergent architecture would play a major role in plant re-discovery by dislodged larvae. We therefore compared the ability of third and fifth Heliothis subflexa instars to locate P. angulata and P. pubescens plants. Heliothis subflexa fifth instars are 29­35 mm long, which is 2­2.5-fold larger than third instars. If H. subflexa larvae are better able to re-locate and infest the shrub-like P. pubescens than the upright P. angulata, higher abscission rates and investment in more, smaller fruit by P. pubescens may represent a direct defense against H. subflexa. In this scenario, because many dislodged larvae perish on the ground, P. angulata would be able to reduce the number of larvae on the plant by abscising fewer fruit. Because other intact fruit are protected, P. angulata would need to produce

fewer fruit total to produce the same number of progeny as P. pubescens.
Moreover, if third instars experience greater difficulty locating Physalis than fifth instars, then earlier abscission increases the effectiveness of this herbivore defense. If the difference between instars is greater when locating P. pubescens than when locating P. angulata, then the disadvantage of P. pubescens' architecture may be compensated by an earlier abscission leading to dropping of smaller instars. This would suggest that the interaction of the host-location abilities of the frugivore with plant architecture may select for different abscission patterns.
Because H. subflexa is a specialist on Physalis species, and shows a number of host plant-specific behaviors (such as using the plant as shelter against parasitoids, and oviposition preference for Physalis) (Oppenheim & Gould, 2002; Benda, 2007), we assessed whether H. subflexa would be more adept at re-locating Physalis plants than a related generalist herbivore. Heliothis virescens Fabricius larvae feed on leaves and fruits of species in more than 14 plant families, including Solanaceae, but not Physalis. Although H. virescens becomes dislodged when cotton fruit is abscised (Adkisson et al., 1964), H. virescens, unlike H. subflexa, also readily feeds on leaves on most of its host plants. Therefore, we hypothesized that H. subflexa larvae have adapted to Physalis fruit abscission with enhanced abilities to re-locate the plant than have H. virescens larvae.
Materials and methods
Laboratory-reared insects
Laboratory-reared H. subflexa and H. virescens third and fifth instars were tested in 2004 and 2005. The H. virescens laboratory colony (YDK strain) was established using eggs from flowering tobacco in Yadkin County, NC, USA, in 1988 (Gould et al., 1995). The H. subflexa laboratory colony (Lab strain) was established using larvae collected from natural populations of Physalis in Florence and Barnwell Counties, SC, USA, in 1996 (Sheck et al., 2006). Heliothis subflexa and H. virescens were reared as outlined by Sheck & Gould (1993).
Larvae used in field bioassays were marked with a spot of either writer's corrective fluid (white or pink), or permanent marker (blue or red), to distinguish the two species. Larvae were transported to the field in a cooler and kept at 26­28 °C until testing.
Wild larvae (2005 only)
Larvae were collected from Physalis fruit in the same field in Clayton, NC, USA (35°37N, 78°26W), where assays were conducted. Larvae were kept individually in 30-ml cups with a fresh P. angulata or P. pubescens fruit until they

Fruit abscission as defense against frugivory 23

reached the instar and age needed for testing (fruit was replaced as necessary). Wild H. subflexa larvae were not marked, because only one insect species was tested.
Physalis plants
In both 2004 and 2005, Physalis plants were started from seeds in the greenhouse. Physalis seeds were from plants grown in our research field in the previous season. Seeds were originally collected from wild populations in Orangeburg County, SC, USA (33°33N, 81°04W) in 1998. Three-week-old seedlings were transferred into ca. 0.5-l black plastic pots and fertilized with one teaspoon of Osmocote 14-14-14 (N-P-K). After transplanting, plants were fertilized weekly with a liquid 20-20-20 foliar spray.
In mid-July 2004, 6-week-old P. angulata and P. pubescens plants were transplanted into two fields: (1) a 0.26-ha field on the NCDA/NCSU Central Crops Research Station (CCRS) (Clayton, NC, USA), and (2) a small field on the Lake Wheeler USDA-ARS research facility (Raleigh, NC, USA). In late June 2005, 10-week-old P. pubescens were transplanted to the CCRS field. In addition to the P. pubescens transplanted to the field,`feral' P. angulata and P. pubescens from the seed bank of previous research seasons in the same field were also used for the bioassays in 2005.
Plants were used for multiple assays, both within and between days. But no plant was used more than three times, in order to incorporate natural variation within the typical architecture of the two Physalis species. One alteration to the architecture was made: in order to standardize the architecture of the P. angulata plants as distinctly different from that of P. pubescens, the occasional lower branch (extending from the main stem) that touched the ground was removed at the main stem of P. angulata plants using plant clippers.
The landscape surrounding the Physalis plants was composed of a relatively smooth sandy top soil and a naturally occurring population of non-solanaceous weeds, mainly sedges and nutsedges (Cyperaceae). While these weeds also occurred under the canopy of the P. angulata plants, the soil surface under the more densely shaded P. pubescens canopy was generally free of other plants. The ground under both the P. pubescens and P. angulata canopies was littered with abscised and often empty calyces.
Behavioral assay of host plant location
One H. subflexa and one H. virescens larva were simultaneously placed at the edge of the canopy of the same Physalis plant. Larvae were gently placed on the soil using a paintbrush to minimize disturbance. Larvae were tested in blocks of four larvae, such that one pair of larvae was placed under the P. angulata canopy at approximately

the same time that another pair was placed under the P. pubescens canopy. Plants used in the assays were 1­2.4 m away from all other Physalis plants. Each larva was observed until it located the Physalis plant or up to 45 min. Occasionally (20 out of 296 observed larvae), the observer lost track of individual larvae during the bioassay. In these instances, the other larvae in the block were still included in the analyses. Observations were recorded on a Sony TCM-353V cassette recorder (Sony Corp., Taiwan).
Two parameters were used to quantify the abilities of larvae to locate Physalis plants. The larvae were scored (1) binomially according to whether or not they were able to successfully locate the Physalis plant, and (2) quantitatively, using the time spent locating the plant. `Location' was defined as completed when the larva had climbed onto the plant and remained there for 30 s.
Early third and fifth instars were tested in the assays. Age within instar was distinguished by the width of the head capsule relative to the body. Early third instars were used, because preliminary feeding assays showed that a newly hatched larva can develop to the third instar in a single P. angulata or P. pubescens fruit that had been manually removed from the plant. Therefore, this is an estimate of the smallest larva that might abandon an abscised fruit. This estimate errs on the side of a later, larger instar, because it assumes the larva remains inside the calyx long enough to finish feeding on the fruit. Fifth instars were used because, as the largest instar, they may be the most able to navigate the heterogeneous terrain under a plant canopy and re-locate the Physalis plant from which they had fallen. Early fifth instars were used to ensure that larvae were motivated to feed (since late fifth instars stop feeding and enter a wandering stage prior to pupation).
An incomplete block design was implemented, where insect species and plant species were tested within each block, and instar and insect origin (laboratory-reared and wild) were tested between blocks. Block accounted for differences between each blocked set of larvae tested [i.e., climatological factors, field site, individual plants, and marking system used (writer's corrective fluid or permanent marker)]. Assays were conducted between 09:30 and 20:00 hours, from 30 July­12 October 2004 and from 10 August­3 October 2005. Air temperature at 5 cm above soil level was 30.4 ± 0.4 °C during these assays [mean ± SE, temperature was measured for 136 plants during the 75 blocked assays (two plants per block)]. Assay blocks occasionally overlapped, such as when a second block of assays was initiated before the 45-min-long observation of the first block had ended. Fixed variables that differed between blocks (instar and insect origin) were regularly dispersed across date and time of day (i.e., not all wild fifth instars were tested on the same day).

24 Benda et al.

Data analysis
To determine whether the successful location of the Physalis plant (success) was affected by plant species, insect species, instar, and interactions, we conducted an analysis using Proc GLIMMIX in the statistical program SAS 9.1.3 (SAS, 2003), assuming a binomial distribution and a logit link, where block was treated as random and all other variables were treated as fixed. GLIMMIX is a procedure designed for specific non-normal distributions such as the dichotomous distribution. Block was treated as a random variable, because it was a source of replication, and all other variables were treated as fixed. The resulting least squares means (LS means) were used to calculate success probabilities and standard errors.
This analysis was conducted using three data sets. (1) Laboratory-reared larvae on P. angulata and P. pubescens. Year was also included in this analysis, as a fixed variable. (Statistical model: success = year | plant species | insect species | instar). (2) Wild larvae on P. angulata and P. pubescens.Only H. subflexa fifth instars were tested. (Statistical model: success = plant species). (3) Wild and laboratory-reared larvae on P. angulata and P. pubescens. Only H. subflexa fifth instars were tested. Insect origin (laboratory-reared vs. wild) was also considered in this analysis, as a fixed variable (Statistical model: success = plant species | insect origin).
The same three data sets and statistical models for success were also applied to analyze the number of minutes to locate the Physalis plant (minutes to location). To determine whether minutes to location was affected by plant species, insect species, and instar, and interactions, we conducted a factorial analysis of variance (ANOVA) using Proc MIXED (SAS, 2003), where block was treated as random and all other variables were treated as fixed. Time values were log-transformed to reduce heterogeneity among the within-treatment variances and to improve normality. Larvae that were unsuccessful in locating the host plant were excluded from further analysis. Although exclusion of unsuccessful larvae reduced sample size and may have incorrectly assumed that larvae will never locate the plant after 45 min, inclusion of these unsuccessful larvae overestimated larval success, inflated the time estimate, and made its distribution more bimodal. Tukey­ Kramer adjustment for multiple comparisons (of LS means) was applied as necessary.
Results
Location of Physalis plants by laboratory-reared Heliothis subflexa and Heliothis virescens larvae
When year was included as a factor in the regression model for laboratory-reared larvae and this model was analyzed using Proc GLIMMIX, the model did not converge because

Figure 1 Mean (+ SE) probability of success of Heliothis subflexa (HS) and Heliothis virescens (HV) larvae locating the Physalis plant per block. Values were calculated across years. All bars represent laboratory-reared larvae (`3rd' or `5th' instars) except the pair labeled `wild'. Numbers on the histogram bars indicate the number of larvae tested. Asterisks indicate a significant difference (P<0.05) between paired bars.
of insufficient variation in subsets of the data (all but one H. subflexa fifth instar located P. pubescens). However, Proc MIXED can better handle data with this characteristic. The same model, analyzed using Proc MIXED, found no effect of year (F1,62 = 0.01, P = 0.9430) or any interactions involving year (P = 0.0765­0.9984), so plant location was analyzed across years (using Proc GLIMMIX). The probabilities of H. subflexa and H. virescens larvae (across instars) successfully locating P. pubescens plants were 0.94 ± 0.03 and 0.79 ± 0.06, respectively (means ± SE, throughout results). These were greater than the success probabilities of larvae locating P. angulata (0.51 ± 0.07 and 0.43 ± 0.07, respectively; effect of plant species: F1,179 = 31.93, P<0.0001) (Figure 1). Heliothis subflexa and H. virescens fifth instars were 1.3- and 1.4-fold more successful, respectively, than third instars (effect of instar: F1,64 = 6.90, P = 0.0108). The probability of H. subflexa larvae (across instars) successfully locating Physalis plants (across plant species) was 0.80 ± 0.05, and was greater than the success probability of H. virescens, which was 0.63 ± 0.06 (effect of insect species: F1,179 = 5.17, P = 0.0241). There were no significant interactions of the three independent variables (P = 0.1745­0.8751).
Location of Physalis plants by wild Heliothis subflexa larvae
Wild H. subflexa fifth instars located the two Physalis species equally well (effect of plant species: F1,6 = 0.52, P = 0.4994) (Figure 1). There was also no significant difference in success probabilities of laboratory-reared and wild H. subflexa fifth instars (F1,37 = 0.20, P = 0.6558). There was a significant interaction of plant species and insect origin (F1,35 = 4.75, P = 0.0361). A Tukey-adjusted

Fruit abscission as defense against frugivory 25

Figure 2 Mean (+ SE) number of minutes that Heliothis subflexa (HS) and Heliothis virescens (HV) larvae took to locate the Physalis plant per block (where unsuccessful larvae were excluded from the analysis). Values were calculated across years. All bars represent laboratory-reared larvae (`3rd' or `5th' instars) except the pair labeled `wild'. Regarding the laboratory-reared larvae only, histogram bars capped with different letters are significantly different (P<0.05) using a Tukey-adjusted t-test of least squares means. Numbers on the histogram bars indicate the number of larvae that successfully located the Physalis plant.
t-test of LS means revealed that this interaction was due to a difference in success probability of laboratory-reared H. subflexa fifth instars between plant species. Within each plant species, there were no significant differences in success probabilities between laboratory-reared and wild H. subflexa (Tukey t-test: P = 0.3264­0.9114).
Time to locate Physalis plants by laboratory-reared Heliothis subflexa and Heliothis virescens larvae
Only four of 67 larvae that were observed for an additional 15 min (for a total of 60 min) successfully located and climbed the Physalis plant. Exclusion of unsuccessful larvae decreased skew in the data set and did not substantially modify the results (analysis not shown). Since most third instars did not successfully locate the P. angulata plant in 2004, a test of the effect of year was conducted using fifth instars only. The amount of time laboratory-reared fifth instars required to locate the Physalis plants did not differ by year (F1,28 = 1.07, P = 0.3088), nor by interactions of other main effects with year (P = 0.1809­0.6475). Therefore, time to plant location (of both instars) was analyzed across years. Heliothis subflexa and H. virescens larvae (across instars) took significantly less time to locate P. pubescens (6.5 ± 1.1 and 8.9 ± 1.7 min, respectively) than to locate P. angulata plants (12.8 ± 2.2 and 16.7 ± 2.9 min, respectively) (effect of plant species: F1,97 = 17.55, P<0.0001) (Figure 2). Effects of instar and insect species were not significant (F1,62 = 3.68, P = 0.0596, and F1,97 = 3.67, P = 0.0585, respectively). The difference between plant species was larger within the third instars than the fifth instars, resulting in a significant

interaction of plant species with instar (F1,97 = 7.99, P = 0.0057). Heliothis subflexa third instars took 2.9 times longer to find P. angulata than to find P. pubescens (Tukeyadjusted t-test of LS means: P = 0.0078), while the time H. subflexa fifth instars took to locate the plant differed between plant species by a factor of only 1.3 (Tukey t-test: P = 0.9994). Similarly, the time H. virescens third and fifth instars took to locate the Physalis plant differed between plant species by a factor of 2.3 and 1.3 (Tukey t-test: P = 0.120 and 0.9857), respectively. All other interactions were not significant (P = 0.2126­0.6244) and were dropped from the analysis.
Time to locate Physalis plants by wild Heliothis subflexa larvae
Wild H. subflexa fifth instars were qualitatively similar to their laboratory-reared counterparts, but with a much larger difference in mean time to locate P. angulata plants (12.3 ± 3.7 min) relative to mean time to locate P. pubescens plants (1.1 ± 0.2 min) (effect of plant species on wild larvae: F1,4 = 47.33, P = 0.0023) (Figure 2). Analyzing across insect origin, there was a significant difference between time to locate P. angulata relative to P. pubescens (effect of plant species: F1,21 = 11.40, P = 0.0029). As a main effect, insect origin was not significant (F1,36 = 0.01, P = 0.9346), but there was a significant interaction of plant species and insect origin (F1,21 = 8.67, P = 0.0077). This was due to a significant difference in the amount of time wild larvae took to find P. angulata relative to P. pubescens (Tukeyadjusted t-test of LS means: P = 0.0087) and no other significant differences among the wild and laboratoryreared fifth instars (P>0.13). As in the comparison of laboratory-reared H. subflexa and H. virescens, exclusion of unsuccessful larvae did not substantially modify the results (analysis not shown).
Discussion
When a H. subflexa larva is dislodged from a plant along with a fallen fruit, fruit abscission effectively reduces the impact of herbivory on the Physalis plant both directly and indirectly. Fruit abscission both reduces the probability of herbivory by the dropped larva on the remaining attached Physalis fruits, and increases the probability of morbidity and mortality of the dropped larva. We found that the effectiveness of the abscission strategy depends on plant species, behavioral specialization of H. subflexa in its ability to locate the Physalis plant, relative to H. virescens, and the size of the dislodged larva.
In general, both instars of both Heliothis species located P. pubescens more effectively than P. angulata. The differences we observed between the two Physalis species are likely due to dramatic differences in their architecture, although our

26 Benda et al.

bioassays were not designed to separate architecture from other plant species-specific traits and potential Heliothis cues, such as chemistry, texture, and color. Nonetheless, larvae appeared to respond to all vertical shapes by reaching towards them ­ raising their head and thorax and waving from side to side in a stereotypical manner (i.e., `questing' in Berdegue et al., 1997). Larvae then climbed the nearest vertical object, regardless of what it was ­ a rock, a blade of grass, or a stem or an over-hanging Physalis leaf. The majority of larvae that climbed onto the Physalis plant did so via bridges created by surrounding vegetation (P. angulata) or overhanging branches and leaves (P. pubescens), not via the main stem of the Physalis plant. The visual and olfactory range of lepidopteran larvae usually does not exceed a few centimeters (Cain et al., 1985; Dethier, 1989), so visual location of the main stem of a Physalis plant from the edge of the canopy is unlikely. Wild H. subflexa fifth instars exhibited the same stereotypical searching behavior as laboratory-reared larvae, and although their success probability in locating plants was similar to that of laboratory-reared H. subflexa fifth instars, this analysis was constrained by small sample size of wild larvae. The distribution of location times was also similar between wild and laboratory-reared insects. Most H. subflexa fifth instars (68­75%) found the Physalis plant within 15 min of being placed on the ground, regardless of insect origin or plant species.
The differences between the insect species in locating a plant (when unsuccessful larvae were included in the analysis) have at least two potential explanations. Heliothis subflexa may respond to host plant cues undetected or not responded to by H. virescens or alternatively, H. virescens larvae may not be as adept as H. subflexa larvae at locating vertical surfaces and climbing them. Cotton, a host plant of H. virescens, abscises fruit in response to herbivory by H. virescens (Adkisson et al., 1964), but the ability of fallen H. virescens larvae to re-establish on the cotton plant is undocumented. Testing H. virescens larvae on their own host plant would reveal if the advantage of H. subflexa larvae is due to an interaction with its host plant or an innate specialized ability. Nevertheless, for both explanations, differences in the ages of the two laboratory colonies might have also contributed to apparent species differences.
Larval size significantly affected location of the Physalis plant. The general searching behavior was the same for both instars, but third instars displayed greater difficulty navigating the terrain, and were often unable to reach a high perch. Third instars may also be more affected by stressors associated with re-locating the host plant than fifth instars (e.g., starvation stressors; van Dam et al., 2001).
We predicted that smaller instars would be less successful at locating plants and that this size-related difference

would be greater for larvae searching for P. pubescens than for larvae searching for P. angulata. Such a pattern would implicate a strong selection force on P. pubescens to drop fruit earlier than P. angulata, which would result in smaller larvae being dropped from the P. pubescens plant. However, we could not relate earlier abscission in P. pubescens to differences in plant-location ability between third and fifth instars. In fact, early abscission, which dislodges younger larvae from the plant, would appear to favor P. angulata more, because its branches infrequently contact the ground. Nonetheless, it is possible that P. pubescens benefits from dislodging even younger first and second instars. The two Physalis species differ markedly in their numerical investments in fruit and rates of abscission. In this context, it is important to consider fruit abscission as a component of an integrated life history syndrome that considers both the reproductive allocation by Physalis and the escalating cost to H. subflexa of feeding on an abscised fruit and searching on the ground for a Physalis plant.
These results demonstrate how plant architecture and abscission patterns may affect herbivore impact on Physalis. Notably, conclusive evidence that fruit abscission serves the Physalis plant as an herbivore defense would require determination of a difference in fitness of plants that abscised or did not abscise fruit. The results of this study demonstrate the specialized ability of H. subflexa to counteract fruit abscission as a defense mechanism by successfully locating the plant from the ground. It would be interesting to compare host plant location by other insect species from abscised plant parts with the location abilities of this specialized herbivore. The effects of instar and plant dispersion on other foraging lepidopteran larvae (Cain et al., 1985; Dethier, 1989) are consistent with the results of this study. However, to better understand the effectiveness and importance of abscission as a defense against herbivores, more studies of the fate of mobile larvae dislodged with abscised fruit are needed.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge Daniel Lillis for assistance conducting observations. This study was supported in part by the W. M. Keck Center for Behavioral Biology, an NSF Pre-Doctoral Fellowship, and the USDA-NRI Competitive Grants Program (grant no. 2003-35302-13373).
References
Adkisson PL, Bailey CF & Hanna RL (1964) Estimates of the number of Heliothis larvae per acre in cotton and their relation to the fruiting cycle and yield of host. Journal of Economic Entomology 57: 657­663.

Fruit abscission as defense against frugivory 27

Bateman M (2006) Impact of plant suitability, biogeography, and ecological factors on associations between the specialist herbivore Heliothis subflexa G. (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae) and the species in its host genus, Physalis L. (Solanaceae), in west-central Mexico. PhD Dissertation, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA.
Benda N (2007) Host location by adults and larvae of specialist herbivore Heliothis subflexa G. (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae). PhD Dissertation, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA.
Berdegue M, White KK & Trumble JT (1997) Feeding deterrence of Spodoptera exigua (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae) larvae by low concentrations of linear furanocoumarins. Environmental Entomology 26: 912­919.
Brazzel JR, Newsom LD, Roussel JS, Lincoln C, Williams FJ & Barnes G (1953) Bollworm and Tobacco Budworm as Cotton Pests in Louisiana and Arkansas. Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, USA.
Cain ML, Eccleston J & Kareiva PM (1985) The influence of food plant dispersion on caterpillar searching success. Ecological Entomology 10: 1­7.
Cross WH (1973) Biology, control, and eradication of the boll weevil. Annual Review of Entomology 18: 17­46.
van Dam NM, Hermenau U & Baldwin IT (2001) Instar-specific sensitivity of specialist Manduca sexta larvae to induced defences in their host plant Nicotiana attenuata. Ecological Entomology 26: 578­586.
Dethier VG (1989) Patterns of locomotion of polyphagous arctiid caterpillars in relation to foraging. Ecological Entomology 14: 375 ­386.
Dohanian SM (1944) Control of the filbert worm and filbert weevil by orchard sanitation. Journal of Economic Entomology 37: 764 ­766.
Espirito-Santo MM & Fernandes GW (2002) Host plant effects on the development and survivorship of the galling insect Neopelma baccharidis (Homoptera: Psyllidae). Austral Ecology 27: 249­257.
Fernandes GW & Whitham TG (1989) Selective fruit abscission by Juniperus monosperma as an induced defense against predators. American Midland Naturalist 121: 389­392.
Gould F, Anderson A, Reynolds A, Bumgarner L & Moar W (1995) Selection and genetic analysis of a Heliothis virescens (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae) strain with high levels of resistance

to Bacillus thuringiensis toxins. Journal of Economic Entomology 88: 1545­1559. Janzen DH (1971) Escape of Cassia grandis L. beans from predators in time and space. Ecology 52: 964­979. Minchinton TE & Dalby-Ball M (2001) Frugivory by insects on mangrove propagules: effects on the early life history of Avicennia marina. Oecologia 129: 243­252. Oppenheim SJ & Gould F (2002) Behavioral adaptations increase the value of enemy-free space for Heliothis subflexa, a specialist herbivore. Evolution 56: 679­689. Pellmyr O & Huth CJ (1994) Evolutionary stability of mutualism between yuccas and yucca moths. Nature 372: 257­260. Racette G, Chouinard G, Vincent C & Hill SB (1992) Ecology and management of plum curculio, Conotrachelus nenuphar (Coleoptera, Curculionidae), in apple orchards. Phytoprotection 73: 85­100. SAS (2003) SAS Software, Version 9.1. SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA. Sheck AL & Gould F (1993) The genetic basis of host range in Heliothis virescens: larval survival and growth. Entomologia Experimentalis et Applicata 69: 157­172. Sheck AL, Groot AT, Ward CM, Gemeno C, Wang J et al. (2006) Genetics of sex pheromone blend differences between Heliothis virescens and Heliothis subflexa: a chromosome mapping approach. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 19: 600­617. Sisterson MS (1997) Natural history of Heliothis subflexa in the southeastern United States. MS Thesis, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA. Stephenson AG (1981) Flower and fruit abortion: proximate causes and ultimate functions. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 12: 253­279. Stiling P, Simberloff D & Brodbeck BV (1991) Variation in rates of leaf abscission between plants may affect the distribution patterns of sessile insects. Oecologia 88: 367­370. Toy RJ, Marshall AG & Pong TY (1992) Fruiting phenology and the survival of insect fruit predators ­ a case study from the South-East Asian Dipterocarpaceae. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series B ­ Biological Sciences 335: 417­423. Waddell KJ, Fox CW, White KD & Mousseau TA (2001) Leaf abscission phenology of a scrub oak: consequences for growth and survivorship of a leaf mining beetle. Oecologia 127: 251­258.

View publication stats

